## What Are the Programming Languages

Programming happens using many different languages. But what does a programming language mean? It is nothing more than a program that has a set of rules through which humans give commands to computers. This set of rules is called the syntax of the programming language (just like with the spoken languages). 

At the beginning communication was really difficult and humans had to give instructions that were tremendously difficult for humans to understand and learn. As time went by more and more languages began to emerge and they were simpler for humans to understand. But how did that happen? Did computers start to understand human words? No! Computers still understand 0s and 1s but the code that programmers write nowadays gets translated into 0s and 1s by a middle tool or tools. 

What sort of middle tools? It depends on the language. **There are two types of languages: compiled and interpreted.** The compiled languages use a compiler. The compiler is a program that takes what you have written and turns it into 0s and 1s. So once you write your program on let's say C (a compiled language), you have to run your compiler and it gives you a file with 0s and 1s.It is as if it rewrites your program into machine language for you. Then you feed your program to the processor (the part of the computer that runs your program) and it starts and runs your programs. 

On the contrary, the languages that are interpreted work differently. I'll start backwards: the people who wrote Python and Ruby (both interpreted) first decided on what the syntax of the language would be and then wrote a program in C, called the interpreter. This program's purpose was to read text files with Ruby/Python code and understand what the commands meant. After that they compiled the program of the interpreter and got the same program but with 0s and 1s. So every time you write your program in Ruby/Python, you give it to the interpreter, which is a 0 and 1 program that runs the commands and therefore the program you wrote. 

So nowadays, you don't have to know those scary languages that our parents used or those that you used to study in school 5-10 years ago. Languages are pretty much like normal English and it is their own business to make themselves readable by the machines (using the middle tools that come together with the language). 

How many programming languages are there? A little bit less than 3000 but you really don't need to know all of them. There are about 10-15 which are widely used. Moreover, they all describe almost similar ideas but using a couple of different phrases. So when you get to know one language well, you can easily learn the syntax of another language in less than a week or two. So you really shouldn't worry that you start with Ruby or Python. Once you know them, you can learn others fast if you want to know them or if you need them. 

But I said many times that you can write programs in all languages? Why should you need to learn others as well? Can't you just do all your programs in the language that you are familiar with? Yes, you can but all languages have different strengths. Python has good tools for math so if you are doing a math related application, it may be a better option. Ruby is fast to write and easy-to-understand so you can easily be productive and write programs fast. C is fast in performance so if you see that some part of your website is slow, you can rewrite it in C, Java or another language. But don't worry right now, these are problems that you will one day encounter in your future programming carrier and then they won't be difficult to solve. 

If you do some additional reading and you run into terms like: object-oriented, functional, procedural languages, etc. ignore them. They are to be undrestood at a more advanced level. Do your exercises and after some practice the terms will pop up in the tutorials and they will be explained. 

## Where to start? 

Start with this tutorial. You first need to know the command line and then, do HTML and Python or Ruby simultaniously. They are quite different in terms of purpose and syntax so most probably you won't have problems. If you have problems, read HTML and CSS first and then Python and Ruby. 

**Which one to choose? Python or Ruby for a first language?** It depends on what you want to do and how much time you have. Python is more widely used and is taught at all introductory courses in the top universities, like MIT. This is where most computer majors in the American system start from. However, Ruby is easier and a little bit more beginner friendly. So I think it is better to choose Ruby because afterwards it is quite easy to switch to Python if you need to. However, if you choose Python because you have friends to help you with it or because it is a bit more mainstream, don't worry. You should be fine :) 
