**Note (a very important one)**: Not all the content is super precise technically but things are simplified to be made more understandable for beginners! 

##HTML, CSS and Python/Ruby

At the beginning of websites, there was HTML. It is a markup language that stands for Hypertext Markup Language and tells the browsers how to display a website. All websites are written on HTML (and other languages). HTML says what the structure of the texts is, which line is the heading, which is a paragraph, some information about the author of the page, etc. What you can build by using HTML is a site that looks like a Word document with pictures and links. 

After some time passed, people got bored of plain looking pages and decided to add some beauty in them. Initially they started adding attributes to the HTML tags, giving information about the color of the headings and paragraphs, their size, etc. and the more beautiful the page, the more messy it was in the source code (source code = the HTML that is given to the browser to read) because the HTML was getting longer and longer. Moreover, programmers had to rewrite the same attributes to every single heading, paragraph or another element so that they had the same formatting. And if they wanted to change the color of all the subheadings, they had to go through all the subheadings in the HTML and change the attributes by hand. So soon people began to realize that they needed to get rid of the formatting to make a clearer HTML and they created CSS, a whole new language mainly consisting of the previous HTML attributes that was dealing with all the formatting of the website. Now programmers write CSS files and import them into the HTML at the beginning of the HTML document so that they don't mess up with the HTML. 

Soon however people began to connect their websites to databases. This happens when you have a lot of changing content into the page, a lot of users, whose information you keep, etc. For example, if you are an online newspaper, your page looks the same everyday in terms of the menu, the number of columns is the same, the leading article is placed in the same place but the actual articles are different and the previous articles from the previous day are kept. Moreover, websites became fancier and there were small blocks in them with programs written in different programming languages (Python, Ruby, C, etc.). These programs were fulfilling certain purposes: for example, to recommend the 5 most read articles, to suggest books that you would like on Amazon, etc. These small programs are written in any programming language. Just as programming languages are used to write these programs that used to come to you on a disk and you installed them and used them on your computer, so are the programs on the website written in a programming language. And that is where Python/Ruby comes into the big picture. It is used to write programs on the websites (called the back-end, as opposed to front-end, which refers to what the user sees when he/she goes to your site).

##Django/Rails, Bootstrap
As more and more sites began using programs and having the same separation between HTML, CSS, programs withing the site, etc. a common structure of the sites began to emerge. This means that a lot of people began to divide they websites into similar pieces of code with different functions: one that consisted of the templates for the pages, one that says which URL leads to which page of the site (URL = page address, the thing that you write into your browser's address bar), etc. Programmers had to "connect" the different prices to make them work together. 

So people made a framework (a tool) that was creating this skeleton on the website instead of them and was making the different pieces work together. This is Django for Python or Rails for Ruby. But what is a framework? It is like a big extension of the language. All the languages have some basic features that usually are not enough for complex programs. For example, Python doesn't have a square root. So people began creating libraries (i.e. extensions) that included a lot of missing things. A framework is a big number of libraries, written in the language. 

So now after the framework created the skeleton of the website (a lot of empty files, ready to be filled with content), programmers just had to fill them with content, meaning the HTML (and other things, like CSS, Javascript, etc). Do programmers write every website from scratch? Fortunately, no! There are a lot of ready-to-use pieces of code that programmers copy and paste. After that, they change what they don't like in the code to make it fit their purposes. A place where there is such ready-to-use code is Bootstrap. 

##Javascript
As sites became more heavy in terms of content and structure, a lot of programmers began to think of ways to make websites faster and more interactive (more amusing to use). They started using another language, called Javascript, which allowed them to make websites with content that could change without refreshing the whole page. For example, you click on a button and it loads the content while the navigation bar and the picture of the logo of the company stay there and don't get reloaded. Or you have a page in two languages and when you change the language it doesn't reload the whole page. There are many more things you can do with Javascript to make the experience of the user better on your page and we will soon learn about them...

##Web development and text editors
So in short, for you to have a webpage, you will need to write in HTML, CSS, Python/Ruby, etc. How do you do that? You make files, with the particular syntax of the language (the correct words that the language uses) and we run these files in a computer, meaning that we execute the program. Writing an HTML, Python or other file, is easy. You open a text editor, like Notepad, gedit or other and you write plain text, which you save with the extension of the language. If you write an HTML file, you save it like that name_of_the_file.html. If you write on Python or Ruby, you use the .py or the .rb extensions respectively. 

**A side note on text editors**: Notepad is often given as an example for a text editor because it comes with Windows and almost everyone has seen it in their lives. However, there are much better text editors that will help you write code by coloring the different parts, closing quotations and all other cool things that programmers do quite a lot. Such are Atom and Sublime Text Editor. You can download them for free and they will always be free. You will never have to pay for them. If you are on Windows, you need to go to the text editor's website and download it. Don't download both, you will need only one text editor for all programming. If you are on Linux or Mac OS, search in Google how to do it (it's easier!). And one last note about Word. Word is not exactly a text editor or at least not one you will prefer. It created a rich text format with a lot of information like different fonts, which prevent programs from running ok. Even though you can save a Word file as a plain text, just don't use Word. Use Atom or Sublime Text Editor. 

##Command Line

We said that you will also have to run your program. How do you run a program? How do you say that you want to start a program? Initially, you will work on small programs, all by yourself on your own laptop (later you will write bigger programs with other people and your site will be on a server but it will be almost the same). The way you run a program on your own computer is by going to a special place in the computer (maybe you didn't know it existed) and this place is called command line. It is the place in which you can give all sorts of commands to your computer regarding programming and much more. In Windows it is called Command Line Prompt (or recently Powershell), in Linux it is called the Terminal or Bash and in MacOS it is called the Terminal again. We will speak about these issues later. 

#Git

At the beginning, this is all you need to write your programs. Once you start making bigger programs and whole websites, you will not just sit on your laptop and do all the coding in a day. You will need a tool that keeps track on what you changed and what was the state of the website before you started in case you later decide that you were wrong to make those changes. The tool that most programmers use for keeping track on their versions of the project is Git/GitHub. It will come later in our course so don't worry about it now. 

So these are the building blocks for this course and now we start with each one of them!   

